+++
weight = 0
hero = "agriculture1.jpg"
pubmed = ""
doi = "10.1101/709162 "
date = 2019-07-27T16:24:48-07:00
title = "Negative plant-microbiome feedback limits productivity in aquaponics"
+++

The demand for food will outpace productivity of conventional agriculture due
to projected growth of the human population, concomitant with shrinkage of
arable land, increasing scarcity of freshwater, and a rapidly changing climate.
Efforts to increase conventional agricultural output come with significant
environmental impacts stemming from deforestation and excessive use of
chemicals, including soil salinization, erosion, and nutrient runoffs. While
aquaponics has potential to sustainably supplement food production with minimal
environmental impact, there is a need to better characterize the complex
interplay between the various components (fish, plant, microbiome) of these
systems to optimize scale up and productivity. For instance, much of our
knowledge of beneficial and detrimental microbial communities vis-Ã -vis crop
productivity comes from studies on plant-microbiome interactions in soil. Here,
we investigated how the practice of continued transfer of microbial communities
from pre-existing systems might promote or impede productivity of aquaponics.
Specifically, we monitored plant growth phenotypes, water chemistry, and
microbiome composition of rhizospheres, biofilters, and fish feces over 61-days
of lettuce (Lactuca sativa) growth in aquaponic systems inoculated with
bacteria that were either commercially sourced or originating from a
pre-existing aquaponic system. Strikingly, L. sativa plant and root growth was
significantly reduced across all replicates inoculated with the established
microbiome. Further analyses revealed the reduced productivity was potentially
a consequence of plant-specific pathogen enrichment, including Pseudomonas,
through transfer of microbiomes from pre-existing systems - a phenomenon
consistent with negative feedbacks in soil ecology. These findings underscore
the need for diagnostic tools to monitor microbiome composition, detect
negative feedbacks early, and minimize pathogen accumulation in aquaponic
systems.

{{< tweet 1154434576116146176 >}}
