+++
hero = ""
pubmed = "23226220"
doi = "10.1371/journal.pone.0049774"
date = "2012-11-30"
title = "Onset of immune senescence defined by unbiased pyrosequencing of human immunoglobulin mRNA repertoires"
weight = 0

+++

The immune system protects us from foreign substances or pathogens by generating
specific antibodies. The variety of immunoglobulin (Ig) paratopes for antigen
recognition is a result of the V(D)J rearrangement mechanism, while a fast and
efficient immune response is mediated by specific immunoglobulin isotypes
obtained through class switch recombination (CSR). To get a better understanding
on how antibody-based immune protection works and how it changes with age, the
interdependency between these two parameters need to be addressed. Here, we have
performed an in depth analysis of antibody repertoires of 14 healthy donors
representing different gender and age groups. For this task, we developed a
unique pyrosequencing approach, which is able to monitor the expression levels
of all immunoglobulin V(D)J recombinations of all isotypes including subtypes in
an unbiased and quantitative manner. Our results show that donors have
individual immunoglobulin repertoires and cannot be clustered according to V(D)J
recombination patterns, neither by age nor gender. However, after incorporating
isotype-specific analysis and considering CSR information into hierarchical
clustering the situation changes. For the first time the donors cluster
according to age and separate into young adults and elderly donors (>50). As a
direct consequence, this clustering defines the onset of immune senescence at
the age of fifty and beyond. The observed age-dependent reduction of CSR ability
proposes a feasible explanation why reduced efficacy of vaccination is seen in
the elderly and implies that novel vaccine strategies for the elderly should
include the "Golden Agers".
