+++
weight = 0
hero = ""
pubmed = "20436919"
doi = "10.1371/journal.pone.0010203"
date = "2010-04-27"
title = "What influences DNA replication rate in budding yeast?"

+++

DNA replication begins at specific locations called replication origins, where
helicase and polymerase act in concert to unwind and process the single DNA
filaments. The sites of active DNA synthesis are called replication forks. The
density of initiation events is low when replication forks travel fast, and is
high when forks travel slowly. Despite the potential involvement of epigenetic
factors, transcriptional regulation and nucleotide availability, the causes of
differences in replication times during DNA synthesis have not been established
satisfactorily, yet.

Here, we aimed at quantifying to which extent sequence properties contribute to
the DNA replication time in budding yeast. We interpreted the movement of the
replication machinery along the DNA template as a directed random walk,
decomposing influences on DNA replication time into sequence-specific and
sequence-independent components. We found that for a large part of the genome
the elongation time can be well described by a global average replication rate,
thus by a single parameter. However, we also showed that there are regions
within the genomic landscape of budding yeast with highly specific replication
rates, which cannot be explained by global properties of the replication
machinery.

Computational models of DNA replication in budding yeast that can predict
replication dynamics have rarely been developed yet. We show here that even
beyond the level of initiation there are effects governing the replication time
that can not be explained by the movement of the polymerase along the DNA
template alone. This allows us to characterize genomic regions with
significantly altered elongation characteristics, independent of initiation
times or sequence composition.
