+++
date = "2011-10-07"
title = "Ensuring low noise in the yeast cell cycle"
weight = 0
hero = ""
pubmed = "21717009"
doi = "10.1039/c1mb05073g"

+++

The budding yeast genome comprises roughly 6000 genes generating a number of
about 10â€‰000 mRNA copies, which gives a general estimation of 1-2 mRNA copies
generated per gene. What does this observation implicate for cellular processes
and their regulation? Whether the number of mRNA molecules produced is important
for setting the amount of proteins implicated in a particular function is at
present unknown. In this context, we studied cell cycle control as one of the
highly fine tuned processes that guarantee the precise timing of events
essential for cell growth. Here, we developed a stochastic model that addresses
the effect of varying the mRNA amount of Sic1, inhibitor of the Cdk1-Clb5 kinase
activity, and the resulting noise on Sic1/Clb5 balance at the G1/S transition.
We considered a range of SIC1 transcripts number according to our experimental
data derived from the MS2 mRNA tagging system. Computational simulation revealed
that an increased amount of SIC1 mRNAs lead to an amplified dispersion of Sic1
protein levels, suggesting mRNA control being critical to set timing of Sic1
downregulation and, therefore, S phase onset. Moreover, Sic1/Clb5 balance is
strongly influenced by Clb5 production in both daughter and mother cells in
order to maintain the characteristic time of S phase entry overall the
population. Furthermore, CLB5 mRNA molecules calculated to reproduce temporal
dynamics of Sic1 and Clb5 for daughter and mother cells agree with recent data
obtained from more complex networks. Thus, the results presented here provide
novel insights into the influence that the mRNA amount and, indirectly, the
transcription process exploit on cell cycle progression.
